---
title: Projects
nav:
  order: 2
  tooltip: Current projects
---

# {% include icon.html icon="fa-solid fa-wrench" %}Projects

We recognize the following main areas in our work: 1) modification of fish, 2) feeds, and 3) feeding methods that help fish thrive in more sustainable environments. All these areas stand on four research pillars that our lab represents: nutritional and environmental programming, gut healing, and larval nutrition.

{% include search-info.html %}

{% include section.html %}

## Modification of Fish
# Nutritional Programming
Replacement of fishmeal (FM) in aquaculture diets with plant protein (PP) has been an ongoing challenge. High-quality PP concentrates are widely used since their digestibility can be comparable to FM. However, their price can exceed the cost of marine raw materials. Progress with utilization of lower-quality PP meals has been made but a number of concerns must be overcome to maintain acceptable growth rates and feed efficiency values at high FM substitution levels. For example, one of those concerns relates to the presence of anti-nutritional factors that have been associated with intestinal inflammation in fish, which can decrease the capacity of fish digestive tract to digest, absorb, and utilize nutrients negatively affecting fish growth and health. This can be to some extent mitigated by the use of functional dietary components, some of which our lab has also discovered. Our main focus, however, has been placed on nutritional programming (NP) - a promising approach that offsets the negative effects of dietary PP in adult fish through brief introduction of PP at an early age. This brief exposure to PP ultimately develops a coping mechanism that leads to a long-lasting ability of fish to assimilate previously undesirable PP. 

Our lab developed an unconventional NP strategy using live food as PP vehicle. This is a much more effective way of improving fish acceptance and utilization capacity of dietary PP compared to the “traditional” NP method, which is normally induced with dry feed during later fish stages. By using enriched live food to program fish at first feeding, we can begin introduction of PP to the fish at the earliest possible point and prevent the programming process from having a negative effect on the fish development in its early life stages. The combination of live food and PP provides all the nutrients required for proper growth and development and at the same time exposes the fish to alternative raw materials and their associated anti-nutritional factors delivered in low enough concentration to induce adaptation of the fish towards the same dietary components later in their life without impairing larval well-being. Our lab also generated new knowledge surrounding NP and showed for the first time that the mechanism behind NP might be associated with endocrine and morphological adaptation of the digestive system that leads to enhanced digestion and absorption capacity of dietary PP that is ultimately reflected by improved growth performance. 

**Why is this important?** This feeding strategy becomes a feasible and practical way of enhancing fish utilization ability of diets based on almost any raw material. The practical outcome of this study provides fish farmers and the feed industry with the possibility of using bigger and more cost-effective raw material basket and hence, allows for more flexibility in formulations of diets deprived of FM. This ultimately supports further development of the aquaculture feed market that contributes to the intensification of more sustainable fish production and reduction in fish production costs.

# Environmental Programming
Aquaculture continues to significantly increase its production, making it the fastest-growing food production sector worldwide. However, the sustainability of the sector is at risk due to the predicted effects of climate change. Climate change can negatively influence food security through increased water scarcity and increased global temperatures; and those effects are not limited to terrestrial environments, with alterations being seen across freshwater and marine habitats as well. Hence, for food production to increase in a sustainable manner to meet the increasing demand for protein, adjustments to current farming practices must be made to accommodate the warming climate. 

The metabolic rate of poikilothermic (cold-blooded) animals, such as fish, is controlled by temperature and, hence, every species has an optimal temperature range (often only a few degrees wide) within which their overall performance is optimal. Any changes in that optimal range, that is water that is warmer or colder, lead to reduced growth performance and/or survival. Animals, however, are also characterized by a certain degree of environmental plasticity and many of their traits related to behavior, stress response, social skills, can be influenced by early life experiences. These plastic responses provide different species with a coping mechanism to changing environmental conditions without altering their genetic makeup, and they may have lasting consequences for the species well-being and survival. The mechanisms behind the induction of the adaptation process and environmental plasticity are not well understood, however epigenetic alterations in DNA seem to play a major role. Specifically, this means that any major changes experienced briefly in life during early development can cause epigenetic alterations in the genotype that will allow the fish to respond to similar triggers better later in their life. Overall, however, the number of studies investigating how the early experiences to abrupt fluctuations in environmental factors affect plasticity in older fish, is still limited. We help expand this area of research by understanding how brief exposure to stress (such as high temperature) induced during early development in a hatchery affects the growth, survival, feeding efficiency, and stress response in adult fish. We believe that short exposure of the fish during their early development to different stressors that are normally experienced in their changing environment will induce changes in the fish leading to better adaptation of those same fish to similar conditions experienced later in life.

**Why is this important?** We strongly believe that this environmental programming approach can become an effective tool in generating fast growing and more resilient future fish generations that will be able to withstand water changes associated with global warming. This can not only contribute to growth in fish production as a food source but also allow for rebuilding of fish populations in regions where water temperatures have permanently shifted in their natural environment preventing the establishment of healthy populations.

## Modification of Feed and Feeding Methods
# Larval Nutrition
The successful growth and survival of many fish species, particularly at their young age, strongly depends on environmental conditions, namely food availability and water quality, making fish production in outdoor systems (i.e. ponds) often unpredictable. To intensify fish production, aquaculture has been moving towards sustainable farming intensification, which utilizes indoor recirculation systems. Such technology, however, poses a challenge related to the lack of naturally occurring live food that larval fish prey on. Therefore, the substitution of live food with formulated diets for the early stages of fish has been a major focus in aquaculture during the last decades in order to reduce costs and increase predictability of juvenile production. Different types of formulated feeds have been examined from dry or frozen live food organisms, feeds supplemented with digestive enzymes, to formulated food particles made using different processing methods. However, weaning most first feeding larval fish completely onto formulated dry feeds has not been fully possible yet.

The larval digestive tract is often not completely developed during the first weeks of life, and therefore protein digestion significantly limits the utilization of formulated feeds in larval fish. The growth of young fish is rapid and consequently requires delivery of amino acids - protein building blocks, in a highly available form for both energy and tissue protein synthesis. These dietary amino acids can be provided in different molecular forms: protein-bound, free amino acids, or peptides, and all induce different responses in larval fish. For example, dietary intact protein is not fully digestible while free amino acid-based diets are not utilized for growth at all. Consequently, development of diets based on the right molecular weight and the optimal amino acid composition that can enhance dietary amino acid assimilation and utilization for tissue protein synthesis and growth has been of uttermost importance. Various protein hydrolysates (digested protein fragments) have been obtained using in vitro methods. However, to date the practical application of in vitro hydrolysis has not been routinely used by the feed industry due to complexity and low repeatability. Our lab proposed for the first time utilization of adult fish digestive tract to digest protein source for larval fish of the same species. Specifically, digestive tracts obtained from adult fish were used to hydrolyze the muscles of low-value invasive species (i.e. Bighead carp) to generate optimal protein hydrolysate that could be easily assimilated within the primitive digestive tract of larval fish. In other words, we digested/hydrolyzed fish muscle in vitro for the larva using fully developed digestive system of the same species as the larva. Our hydrolysis method and later proteomic analysis proved that incubation of protein substrate with an “enzymatic cocktail” - supernatant obtained from adult fish digestive tracts allows for the breakage of complex intact protein into lower molecular size products. This novel dietary ingredient approach supported growth and development of fish larvae in different species which likely resulted from matching the specific requirements of the larvae with respect to their digestive organ development, levels of digestive enzymes present in the gut, and nutritional requirements.

**Why is this important?** This outcome becomes a major milestone in larval fish nutrition on both scientific and practical levels. Specifically, this outcome has created three main opportunities: 1) utilization of invasive species and fish byproducts ( “guts”) in the production of high-quality protein ingredients for larval feeds; 2) production of more robust and healthy larval fish with better adaptation capacity to formulated diets and therefore, a much easier weaning process (transition from live food to dry food); and 3) successful approach in the development of high-quality starter feeds that supports sustainable expansion of the hatchery sector.

# Gut Healing

Soybean meal (SBM), as well as many other lower-quality PP sources, contain large amounts of non-starch polysaccharides and anti-nutritional factors that negatively affect the growth and intestinal health of both omnivorous and carnivorous species. Anti-nutritional factors are a crucial restriction to greater use of this highly available and low-cost ingredient as a replacement for FM in aquafeeds. Therefore, a large portion of our research has focused on the development of mitigation strategies towards reducing gut inflammation in fish. First, we have identified alternative feeding strategies. We found, for example, that alternating feeding using FM and SBM-based diets can help fish achieve growth performance similar to those fed FM diet continuously and reduce the overall cost associated with feeding. Second, we have developed “functional feed” approaches that can help counteract inflammatory triggers induced by SBM. Specifically, we have identified certain compounds such as dipeptides (carnosine and anserine) or essential oil extracts (i.e. oregano) as health-promoting additives which can improve growth performance and intestinal lining of fish fed high SBM-based diets. Finally, we have also investigated non-invasive methods in detection of gut inflammation in fish through analysis of biomarkers such as calprotectin and lipocalin in fecal samples. These non-fatal health indicators have potential to help farmers detect the onset of gut inflammation in their fish before it significantly impairs their overall performance. 

The innovative approaches to gut healing we have developed are not focused on modifying the quality of SBM but rather on changing current feeding protocols or adjusting/improving the commercial feed formulations with the addition of health supplements to accommodate higher levels of the existing conventional SBM. 

**Why is this important?** The outcomes of this work therefore provide feed producers with the possibility of using higher levels of SBM in feeds, hence, allowing for more flexibility in formulations of diets deprived of FM and high-cost protein concentrates/isolates. 



